---
layout: 	post
date:   	2016-01-01
title:  	Bruno Tomberg
year:		1925
eka_et:		Tallinna Riiklik Tarbekunsti Instituut, 1950
eka_en:		Tallinn State Applied Art Institute, 1950
image_sm:	/images/tomberg-front.jpg
images:
  -
    src: 		/images/tomberg-drawing1.jpg
    caption_et: Taluelamu,  III kursus, 1947, juhendaja E.&nbsp;Velbri, vaade talitusõuelt
    caption_en: Farmhouse, 3rd year, 1947, supervisor E.&nbsp;Velbri, view from yard
  -
    src: 		/images/tomberg-drawing2.jpg
    caption_et: Taluelamu,  III kursus, 1947, juhendaja E.&nbsp;Velbri, I korruse plaan
    caption_en: Farmhouse, 3rd year, 1947, supervisor E.&nbsp;Velbri, ground-floor plan
  -
    src: 		/images/tomberg-drawing3.jpg
    caption_et: Tallinna Riikliku Raamatukogu lugemissaali ja vestibüüli kujundus, diplomitöö, 1950, juhendaja E.&nbsp;J.&nbsp;Kuusik, vestibüüli perspektiivvaade
    caption_en: Design for the reading hall and lobby of the Tallinn State Library, graduate project, 1950, supervisor E.&nbsp;J.&nbsp;Kuusik, perspective view of the lobby
  -
    src: 		/images/tomberg-drawing4.jpg
    caption_et: Tallinna Riikliku Raamatukogu lugemissaali ja vestibüüli kujundus, diplomitöö, 1950, juhendaja E.&nbsp;J.&nbsp;Kuusik, lugemissaali perspektiivvaade
    caption_en: Design for the reading hall and lobby of the Tallinn State Library, graduate project, 1950, supervisor E.&nbsp;J.&nbsp;Kuusik, perspective view of the reading hall
---

{% include image.html image_src="/images/tomberg-work.jpg" type="work" %}
{% include header.html %}
{% include title.html title=page.title year=page.year eka_et=page.eka_et eka_en=page.eka_en %}

Bruno Tomberg on disainer ja õppejõud, üks Eesti disainihariduse rajajaid, Eesti Kunstiakadeemia emeriitprofessor. 1966. aastal pandi tema initsiatiivil alus ERKI tööstuskunsti kateedrile, tänasele disainiteaduskonnale, kust on poole sajandi jooksul välja kasvanud mitu põlvkonda Eesti tootedisainereid. Samuti kutsus Tomberg ellu näitustesarja „Ruum ja vorm“. Eesti tekstiilikunsti on ta tugevalt mõjutanud omas ajas moodsate vaibakavanditega.

Bruno Tomberg is a designer and an instructor, one of the foundation-layers of Estonian design education, and a Professor Emeritus at the Estonian Academy of Arts (EAA). The groundwork for the State Art Institute of the Estonian SSR’s Department of Industrial Art was done at his initiative – today, this is the EAA Faculty of Design, which has trained several generations of Estonian product designers over the course of half a century. Tomberg was also responsible for bringing to life the “Space and Form” exhibition series. Throughout his career, Tomberg has strongly impacted Estonian textile art with his rug designs.

{% include image.html image_src="/images/tomberg-portrait.jpg" type="portrait" %}
{% include player.html audio="//soundcloud.com/user-933497120/bruno-tomberg-intervjuu-ekspeditsioon-wunderlich-11-sisearhitekti" %}

### Interview. {{ page.title }} (excerpts)

#### 0.19-1.20

I was very good at drawing and painting. You know, when your aunties and uncles come to visit and ask: “And what will become of the little one?” I would always get angry at this because I never had this grand dream of becoming a pilot or a chimneysweep. I always knew that I would become a painter. So I always answered, angrily, that I would become a painter. I nearly did become one, because I really was good at drawing, and painting too. And to this day I can remember [my mother’s] words: “Most painters are poor as church mice. They have jobs and, if they have a lot of talent, they do art on the side. There are very few artists who can make a living and feed their families off their art.”

#### 7.24-7.48

I think that a man should be able to remain honest in front of himself: to avoid lying to oneself, creating personal illusions. But the path to acquiring this clarity of vision, distinguishing between fact and illusion – this is difficult.

#### 10.20-10.37

The thing that I miss the most is taking walks in the forest. Throughout my life, the forest has been my cathedral. And I cannot go and pick mushrooms, this is a great failing indeed.

{% include images.html images=page.images %}




