---
layout: 	post
date:   	2016-01-01
title:  	Aulo Padar
year:		1940
eka_et:		Eesti NSV Riiklik Kunstiinstituut, 1968
eka_en:		State Art Institute of the Estonian SSR, 1968
image_sm:	/images/padar-front.jpg
images:
  -
    src: 		/images/padar-drawing1.jpg
    caption_et: Ühepereelamu, I kursus, 1964, juhendaja E.&nbsp;Velbri, põhiplaan ja asendiplaan
    caption_en: Single-family dwelling, 1st year, 1964, supervisor E.&nbsp;Velbri, floor- and site plan
  -
    src: 		/images/padar-drawing2.jpg
    caption_et: Ühepereelamu, I kursus, 1964, juhendaja E.&nbsp;Velbri, vaade lõunast
    caption_en: Single-family dwelling, 1st year, 1964, supervisor E.&nbsp;Velbri, view from the south
  -
    src: 		/images/padar-drawing3.jpg
    caption_et: Viljandi näidiskatsesovhoosi peahoone sisekujundus, diplomitöö, 1968, juhendaja B.&nbsp;Tomberg, plaanid
    caption_en: Interior design for the Viljandi Model Sovkhoz, graduate project, 1968, supervisor B.&nbsp;Tomberg, design plans
  -
    src: 		/images/padar-drawing4.jpg
    caption_et: Viljandi näidiskatsesovhoosi peahoone sisekujundus, diplomitöö, 1968, juhendaja B.&nbsp;Tomberg, lõige
    caption_en: Interior design for the Viljandi Model Sovkhoz, graduate project, 1968, supervisor B.&nbsp;Tomberg, section

---

{% include header.html %}
{% include title.html title=page.title year=page.year eka_et=page.eka_et eka_en=page.eka_en %}

Aulo Padar on sisearhitekt ja õppejõud. Tema loomingu tähtsaima osa moodustavad avalike hoonete ja endiste kolhoosikeskuste interjöörid. Koostöös arhitekt Toomas Reinuga valmisid endise Linda kolhoosi peahoone Kobelas (1971–73) ning Rapla KEK-i peahoone Raplas (1973–77). Samuti kuulus Padar Moskva olümpiamängudeks ehitatud Pirita purjespordikeskuse (1975–80) autorite kollektiivi. Tema loomingusse kuulub ka valuutapoe Turist (1981–82) ning nüüdseks hävinud poliitharidusmaja, hilisema Sakala keskuse (1982–86) sisearhitektuur.

Aulo Padar is an interior architect and an educator. Designs for the interiors of public buildings and former kolkhoz centres constitute the bulk of his works. In collaboration with architect Toomas Rein, Padar designed the main building of the former Linda Kolkhoz in Kobela (1971–73) and the headquarters of the Rapla KEK Construction Company in Rapla (1973–77). Padar was also one of the authors of the Pirita Yachting Centre (1975–80), which was constructed for the 1980 Olympic Games. His accomplishments also include the interior architecture for the Soviet “Tourist” foreign-currency store (1981–82) and the ESSR Political Education Centre (later the Sakala Centre, 1982–86; since demolished).

{% include image.html image_src="/images/padar-portrait.jpg" type="portrait" %}
{% include player.html audio="//soundcloud.com/user-933497120/aulo-padar-intervjuu" %}

### Interview. {{ page.title }} (excerpts)

#### 0.00-1.45

Both the architect and the interior architect deal with people. The architect very often focuses on the large-scale form and may forget about the logic of space distribution. The role of the interior architect could be to try to remedy this.

Back then – and as I understand, this applies also nowadays – we never wanted to be a department for artisans, instead we took an interest in the notion of space. I personally have done a lot of architecture: adapted it, redesigned, and done a few things on my own as well. So the Estonian term sisearhitektuur (interior architecture) was also somewhat a result of what was taught at school.

It started when Väino [Tamm] was the Head of Department. As far as I can remember, there was no other reason than the example of Finland. In Finland, they also called it interior architecture. Väino took many trips to Finland and, at that time, there was this great enthusiasm for everything Finnish. So we adapted their programs a bit and – as far as I can remember – this is how the notion of interior architecture was developed.

Of course, the pertinence of the word also depends on the individual designer. If someone does not touch the architectural part at all but just puts up nice curtains, then the term “architecture” does not apply. It really does apply to those who get involved in the architectural design.

{% include images.html images=page.images %}
