---
layout: 	post
date:   	2016-01-01
title:  	Pille Lausmäe
year:		1958
eka_et:		Eesti NSV Riiklik Kunstiinstituut, 1983
eka_en:		State Art Institute of the Estonian SSR, 1983
image_sm:	/images/lausmae-front.jpg
images:
  -
    src: 		/images/lausmae-drawing1.jpg
    caption_et: Administratiivhoone eskiisprojekt, V kursus, 1983, juhendaja L. Leesaar, perspektiivvaade
    caption_en: Draft project for an administrative building, 5th year, 1983, supervisor L. Leesaar, perspective view
  -
    src: 		/images/lausmae-drawing2.jpg
    caption_et: Administratiivhoone eskiisprojekt, V kursus, 1983, juhendaja L. Leesaar, perspektiivvaade
    caption_en: Draft project for an administrative building, 5th year, 1983, supervisor L. Leesaar, perspective view

  -
    src: 		/images/lausmae-drawing3.jpg
    caption_et: Tooli kavand, diplomitöö, 1983, juhendaja J. Lember
    caption_en: Chair design, graduate project, 1983, supervisor J. Lember
---

{% include image.html image_src="/images/lausmae-work.jpg" type="work" %}
{% include header.html %}
{% include title.html title=page.title year=page.year eka_et=page.eka_et eka_en=page.eka_en %}

Pille Lausmäe on sisearhitekt ja õppejõud. Ta on kavandanud arvukalt nii avalike kui ka eluhoonete interjööre ja unikaalmööblit. Lausmäe looming on väljapeetud ja soliidne, oma vormides ja värvides lakooniliselt lihtne ja terviklik. Tema olulisemate tööde hulka kuuluvad teiste seas Kumu kunstimuuseumi (2005), LHV panga (alates 2006) ja Viljandi riigigümnaasiumi (2013) interjöörid.

Pille Lausmäe is an interior architect and instructor. She has designed a wealth of both public and residential interiors in addition to unique furniture pieces. Lausmäe’s works are respectable and dignified; they are laconically simple and whole in terms of their forms and colours. The interiors of the Kumu Art Museum of Estonia (2005), the LHV Bank Headquarters (since 2006), and the Viljandi State Gymnasium (2013) are among her more significant works.

{% include image.html image_src="/images/lausmae-portrait.jpg" type="portrait" %}
{% include player.html audio="//soundcloud.com/user-933497120/pille-lausmae-intervjuu-ekspeditsioon-wunderlich-11-sisearhitekti" %}

### Interview. {{ page.title }} (excerpts)

#### 0.00-1.58

Why would I like the notion of interior architecture to live on in Estonia? I have a feeling that we have managed to create a profession, a school here that respects a human focus. Of course, I would like to recommend that colleagues continue to stick to the principles, uphold professional dignity – the way it used to be some decades ago. So that we would be valued as professionals, not just a link in the chain of those who produce technical specifications.

Interior architects should also be vehicles for culture in the broader sense. Ideally, they could serve as the tie that joins applied and fine art.

In my opinion, good architecture is a necessary precondition for creating good interior architecture. The architecture of the building has to speak to the interior architect. Windows, proportions – if the building is ridiculous inside, the interior architect cannot do a good job. Another important aspect is attention to detail – this is something that architects also often have no time or energy for, I know very few ‘detail freaks’.

{% include images.html images=page.images %}
