---
layout: 	post
date:   	2016-01-01
title:  	Eerik Olle
year:		1960
eka_et:		Eesti NSV Riiklik Kunstiinstituut, 1983
eka_en:		State Art Institute of the Estonian SSR, 1983
image_sm:	/images/olle-front.jpg
images:
  -
    src: 		/images/olle-drawing1.jpg
    caption_et: Lükandseinad elamus, diplomitöö, 1983, juhendaja A. Padar, sõlmed, uksed
    caption_en: Sliding walls in a private dwelling, graduate project, 1983, supervisor A. Padar, junctions and doors
  -
    src: 		/images/olle-drawing2.jpg
    caption_et: Lükandseinad elamus, diplomitöö, 1983, juhendaja A. Padar, aksonomeetria, sõlmed
    caption_en: Sliding walls in a private dwelling, graduate project, 1983, supervisor A. Padar, axonometric projection and junctions
---

{% include image.html image_src="/images/olle-work.jpg" type="work" %}
{% include header.html %}
{% include title.html title=page.title year=page.year eka_et=page.eka_et eka_en=page.eka_en %}

Eerik Olle on sisearhitekt, kes alustas erialast tööd kunstitoodete kombinaadis ARS. Eesti taasiseseisvumise järel on ta tegutsenud eri sisearhitektuuribüroodes. Tema loomingu hulka kuuluvad mitmed äri- ja eluhoonete siselahendused, teiste seas SEB Eesti Ühispanga peahoone interjöör (1999). Õppejõuna on Olle jaganud teadmisi Eesti Kunstiakadeemia sisearhitektuuri eriala tudengitele. Ta on kirglik muusik ja juba tudengiajast peale löönud basskitarristina kaasa mitmes ansamblis (Päratrust 1980–83, Singer Vinger alates 1986).

Eerik Olle is an interior architect, who began working professionally at the ARS art-product combine. His works include interior solutions for several commercial buildings like the interiors of the SEB Eesti Ühispank’s headquarters (1999), as well as for residential buildings. Since Estonia’s re-independence, Olle has been involved in various interior-architecture bureaus. He has also shared his expertise with students as an instructor at the Estonian Academy of Arts. He is a passionate musician and has played bass in a number of bands since his student years (Päratrust 1980–83, Singer Vinger since 1986).

{% include image.html image_src="/images/olle-portrait.jpg" type="portrait" %}
{% include player.html audio="//soundcloud.com/user-933497120/eerik-olle-intervjuu" %}

### Interview. {{ page.title }} (excerpts)

#### 0.00-2.15

I had one piece that lasted very long – a stool that I made at the end of first year [at the Art Intitute]. I used it when I made repairs at home. Which is why its looks were a bit worse for wear but, strangely enough, it never fell apart. At some point, I decided that the old thing was wasting space, so I took an axe and chopped it into pieces.

Ideally, interior architecture is a discipline that binds together all the different parts of a project (to a smaller or larger extent). Of course, it is possible to get by without an interior architect; it would not be the end of the world. I think that interior architecture or an interior architect should be able to create an environment where people sense harmony.

There are those who believe interior architecture to be an art and those who treat it as a technical discipline. I tend to side with the second group – those that do not really think of it as an art – but it is, no doubt, related to art quite closely. Maybe it is about what one considers more important. I tend to try and look at things from the functional perspective – what might also be called the technical or rational point of view. There are others who have a revelation of an aesthetic image and then try to storm in with that image.

{% include images.html images=page.images %}
